I’m an add person to be a software engineer. Even though I’ve grown up with YouTube and Instagram, I rarely use them. Somehow, even as a kid, I knew to keep them at arms length. As a higher schooler, I only allowed myself Instagram on weekends, thinking of protecting myself from my “pride”. Looking back, this misguided self abasement ended up keeping me from developing a social media habit like so many of my friends. 

As I read Digital Minimalism by Cal Newport, I was reminded of my minimalist leanings as he discussed average cell phone usage. While most of my peers routinely exceed 5 hours of phone usage, mine is rarely above 2 hours a day, including my heavy usage of Apple Maps and the phone camera app Camo. In reality, I likely “use” my phone in the way we’ve come to imagine 30 minutes a day. 

That’s not to say I haven’t had my struggles. I compulsively check my laptop for the latest news on Twitter and elsewhere. For some reason, the call of the laptop is stronger to me than the siren call of the phone. It might be that the laptop appears to offer “richer” experiences than quick texts and “Snaps” as the kids call them. Yet as I’ve discovered in reading Digital Minimalism, the laptop I use for “work” can be just as much of a trap as the tiny computer I lug around in my pocket. 

With this in mind, I’m officially kicking off an experiment to ban myself from Twitter for 30 days. To execute this ban, I’ll be using Cold Turkey Blocker, which has limited me to 30 minutes per day on Twitter. This 30 minute limit may have kept me somwhat focused on work, but it never broke the CMD+T -> Tw… shortcut my hands have locked in whenever I open a new Firefox window. 

My hope is that by taking a more radical approach, I can become more intentional at work and dive more deeply into it without the comforting sugar rush of Twitter whenever I get bored. My hope is that in the spirit of The Power of Habits, I find new habits to fill the old spaces. 

What will my new habit be? I’m hoping that I can replace my compulsive Twitter check with compulsive use of the Remarkable tablet. The Remarkable is an e-ink note taking device designed to provide a low distraction way to get down thoughts that is more portable than paper. What I’ve discovered on my better days is that I go to Twitter when confused. Instead of taking time to think through the problem at hand, I rush to the comfort of “interesting” takes on Twitter. When my better angels win out, I write down my problem and find a new way to look at it. Or I take a much needed break to get away from the blue light constantly bathing my face.

My more selfish and “non-productive” goal in this experiment is to drive forward my “working” life’s purpose. By “working” I mean incomplete and in progress. My current life purpose is to curate unusual sources of information to synthesize original ideas. 

In the end, I hope that Twitter can become my ally in this life purpose. While the way I use Twitter is awful, I don’t believe it is entirely useless. That said, my relationship with it is currently causing more harm than good. By “taking a break” from my relationship with Twitter, I’m hoping to develop more intentional practices related to finding interesting information and producing interesting content. Then, once I’ve got my process down, apart from the chatter of Twitter, I can use strategies like thresholding from Tweet(?) to filter the signal from the noise. 

Why not just do that now? Why not just quite smoking? Because it’s hard. It’s hard to be around cigarettes all the time when you are trying to quit. I want to quit first, then figure out the healthy move next, once I’m in a better head space. 

Why does all of this matter? Because like many other technologists, if I’m concerned about my usage, you should be, too. We know better than any other the cost of the tools we create. We see it in our friends, family, and ourselves. We are increasingly beholden to the tools we created to help us. Much like in Wall-E, these magical devices are causing a slow decay, at least as they are used now. 

In some ways, our bodies literally have not caught up to our tools. In Digital Minimalism, Cal Newport points out that we evolved to crave incedibly complex social interaction. As most of us know, our interactions online are often anything but complex, degrading into us vs. them battles. 

What I’m finding is that most of us have attempted to adapt ourselves to the tools around us. It’s hard not to, considering all the wonderful things our tools enable. Who could have imagined being connected to 1000 people from around the world 50 years ago? Who could have imagined being able to learn to change your oil via a tiny screen? 

Yet I wonder if we don’t have it backwards. Humans are an exceptionally adaptive species, but even we have our limits. There are just some things we can’t change, from our eyes (link to computer related pain + blue light), to our teeth (sugar problems in Power of Habits). Our bodies, as nimble as they are, can’t always keep up. 

More and more, as the pace of innovation grows, we must learn to adapt the technologies to ourselves to get the most use out of them (that or adapt them to robots). 

My coworkers are taking notice of this reality. Litered throughout the office are standing desks, ergonomic chairs, and split keyboards, all attempts to adapt our technology to us and not the other way around. 

As digital natives, we need to think smarter about our environment. Our ancestors thought deeply about their physical geography and we must think with equal depth about the digital world around us. 

In the future, perhaps we will adapt. Maybe we will come to consider some digital goods like poison, evolving to “taste” bad information. Maybe we will learn to avoid screens like rattlesnakes and to keep the addictive draw of social media at arms length. 

Until then, we have to find a way to adapt these technologies for our own use. Just as the Italian immigrants I call my ancestors learned to watch for the dangers of the hattery in which they worked, we too will have “worker safety” signs all around the internet. 

We can start to build a “safer” workplace for our minds, bodies, and souls by adapting our powerful, yet dangerous tools for our best use. 

————————

What do I do with this essay? Is it a spin post? Personal post? Something else? Discussion topic?

—————— 

Return to the office

A few weeks ago I wrote the start of a post about returning to the office. In it, I said we might be asking the wrong question, “In person or remote?” I proposed that our main concern should instead be how well we collaborate. 

I stand by that framing and I think it’s an important distinction to make. Atomic Object is all about collaboration after all. We are also a multi office company. No matter what we do, we will inevitably have to learn to collaborate, whether it be in person or remote. 

Yet after a week of working in person, I’m not sure collaboration is the most important thing about working in the office. In fact, I think it’s a symptom of the real reason we work in person: trust. 

It’s hard to argue that good collaboration can exist without trust (just take a look at our government). Yet it’s not so obvious why trust is created best in person. 

I think emerging from the pandemic, where life on the screen became normal, we struggle to realize what we lost in the retreat. As adaptable as we are, we can often forget just what our past selves felt like. 

So instead of talking about our experience on screen, I’d like to talk about my dog’s. My puppy is now almost a year old. As long as my girlfriend and I have had him, we’ve been separated by 30 minutes and 30 miles, which means a lot of back and forth for the little guy. It also means a lot of Facetime. 

What I find interesting about this is that my dog so obviously reacts differently to us on Facetime than in person. While this may sound obvious, I’m not sure it is. This idea is obvious in dogs but subtle in humans. We understand screens and Facetime and thus feel like we are still getting the same human contact out of it, slightly diminished. 

Dogs, on the other hand, don’t understand the concept of Facetime (or at least I don’t think they do). So they react to the reality of it, rather than the theory of it. In theory, Facetime is a viable replacement for human contact. And don’t get me wrong, it’s a wonderful invention. But, I think we overvalue it. Dogs, who are more in touch with reality than us, get it. 

When I say hi to my dog via Facetime, his ears perk up and he wags his tail, until he realizes I’m not there. Then he’s off to more interesting things. He knows I am not really there. 

I think we sometimes forget that these amazing tools we have aren’t teleportation. They are projection. They project parts of us, lower fidelity than the real thing. 

And I think we also forget that we are not so different than dogs. We are both new to the game of digital technology. Just as my dog doesn’t understand FaceTime, nor do I, at least not really. I don’t know it’s long term effects, or how it interacts with my biology. 

My understanding of its effects are coarse grained at best. Fuzzy and imprecise. 